docs: add device flow documentation (#2026)
ory/docs: docs/oauth2-oidc/device-authorization.mdx

---
id: device-authorization
title: Device Authorization
sidebar_label: Device authorization flow
---

The OAuth 2.0 Device Authorization Grant -also known as Device Flow- is OAuth 2.0 extension that enables devices with no browser
or limited input capability to obtain an access token. It enables users to authenticate devices with limited input capabilities,

> such as smart TVs, gaming consoles, or IoT devices, by delegating the authentication process to another device with a full browser

Author: It authorizes the device to access APIs on behalf of the user, but the user needs to authenticate in order to authorize the device. I will try to reword this.

such as a smartphone or computer.

This document provides an overview of the Device Authorization Grant, a step-by-step example of its implementation, configuration
options, and guidance on creating custom user interfaces for the verification screen.

## Overview of the flow

Here is the high-level overview for the Device Authorization Flow:

1. The device requests to be authorized from the Authorization Server.
1. The user is instructed to visit a URL on a different device and is given a user code.

> 1. On a different device the user, visits the URL, provides the user code, logs in and grants access to the device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. On a different device the user visits the URL, provides the user code, logs in, and grants access to the device.
```

1. The device polls the Authorization Server. Once the user authenticates and grants access, an access token is returned that can
   be used to access the protected resource.

### Device requests authorization

> The user tries to log in in the limited input device. The device sends a POST request to the Authorization Server to initiate the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The user tries to log in through the limited input device. The device sends a POST request to the Authorization Server to initiate the
```

reads a bit weird with double "in" - would this be a good alternative wdyt?

Author: agreed

flow with the following parameters:

> - `client_id`: The ID of the client that is making the request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `client_id`: The ID of the client that's making the request.
```

- `scope` (optional): The scope of the access request, which specifies what resources the requesting application can access.

The Authorization Server responds with the following information:

- `device_code`: A unique code to identify the authorization request.
- `user_code`: A code the user will enter at the verification URL.
- `verification_uri`: The URL where the user can authorize the device.
- `verification_uri_complete`: The URL where the user can authorize the device, with the user_code already filled in.
- `expires_in`: The lifespan of the device code (in seconds).
- `interval`: The polling interval (in seconds) for the client to check if the user has authorized the device.

### Display user code and verification URI

The device shows the user the `user_code` and `verification_uri` it received from the Authorization Server.

The user visits the provided URI on a separate device, such as a smartphone, and enters the code.

### User grants permission

> Once the user enters the code, they are prompted to log in, if not already authenticated, and grant or deny permission to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the user enters the code, they're prompted to log in, if not already authenticated, and grant or deny permission to the
```

---
id: device-authorization
title: Device Authorization
sidebar_label: Device authorization flow
---

> The OAuth 2.0 Device Authorization Grant (also known as Device Flow) is OAuth 2.0 extension that enables devices with no browser

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OAuth 2.0 Device Authorization Grant -also known as Device Flow- is OAuth 2.0 extension that enables devices with no browser
```

generally try to avoid parentheses in text

or limited input capability to obtain an access token. It enables users to authenticate devices with limited input capabilities,

> such as smart TVs, gaming consoles, or IoT devices, by delegating the authentication process to another device with a full browser
> (e.g., a smartphone or computer).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
such as smart TVs, gaming consoles, or IoT devices, by delegating the authentication process to another device with a full browser such as a smartphone or computer.
```

avoid abbreviations like e.g.

This document provides an overview of the Device Authorization Grant, a step-by-step example of its implementation, configuration
options, and guidance on creating custom user interfaces for the verification screen.

> ## Overview of the Flow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Overview of the flow
```

sentence casing in headlines

Here is the high-level overview for the Device Authorization Flow:

> 1. The device requests to be authorized from the Authorization server.

Reviewer: is "Authorization server" a term that is specific to this flow here? 

If yes I would say capitalize it as "Authorization Server"; pelase use "authorization server" throughout the document.

> 2. The user is instructed to visit a URL on a different device and is given a user code.
> 3. On a different device the user, visits the URL, provides the user code, logs in and grants access to the device.
> 4. The device polls the Authorization server. Once the user authenticates and grants access, an access token is returned that can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The user is instructed to visit a URL on a different device and is given a user code.
1. On a different device the user, visits the URL, provides the user code, logs in and grants access to the device.
1. The device polls the Authorization server. Once the user authenticates and grants access, an access token is returned that can
```

markdown should number this automatically

   be used to access the protected resource.

> ### Step 1: Device Requests Authorization

Reviewer: generally not a fan of "Step X:" in headlines. 
However I can't think of a better way to express this here 🤔

Author: I used the auth code docs as inspiration. Perhaps I can just remove the `Step X` prefix? I will give it a shot

> ### Step 1: Device Requests Authorization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 1: Device requests authorization
```

The user tries to log in in the limited input device. The device sends a POST request to the Authorization server to initiate the
flow with the following parameters:

- `client_id`: The ID of the client that is making the request.
- `scope` (optional): The scope of the access request, which specifies what resources the requesting application can access.

The Authorization server responds with the following information:

- `device_code`: A unique code to identify the authorization request.
- `user_code`: A code the user will enter at the verification URL.
- `verification_uri`: The URL where the user can authorize the device.
- `verification_uri_complete`: The URL where the user can authorize the device, with the user_code already filled in.
- `expires_in`: The lifespan of the device code (in seconds).
- `interval`: The polling interval (in seconds) for the client to check if the user has authorized the device.

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

no `<hr/>` please

> ## Step 2: Display User Code and Verification URL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 2: Display user code and verification URI
```

is it URL or URI?

The device shows the user the `user_code` and `verification_uri` it received from the OAuth server.

> The user visits the provided URL on a separate device (e.g., a smartphone) and enters the code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The user visits the provided URL on a separate device such as a smartphone and enters the code.
```

same as above

> ## Step 3: User Grants Permission

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 3: User grants permission
```

see above

> Once the user enters the code, they are prompted to log in (if not already authenticated) and grant or deny permission to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the user enters the code, they are prompted to log in if not already authenticated and grant or deny permission to the
```

same as above

client. After granting permission, the user is redirected to a page confirming successful login.

> ## Step 4: Device Polls for the Access Token

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 4: Device polls for the access token
```

see above

While the user is authorizing the device, the device polls the `token` endpoint of the Authorization server to check whether the
user has completed the authorization process, by making a POST request with the following parameters:

- `client_id`: The ID of the client that is making the request.
- `device_code`: The device code received from the device authorization request.
- `grant_type`: This should always be `urn:ietf:params:oauth:grant-type:device_code`.

After the user grants permission, the Authorization server will respond with an access token.

> ## Configuration Options

Reviewer: best practice would be to have _some_ text under each headline, not sure what you could write in this case 🤔

> ## Configuration Options

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configuration options
```

see above

> ### Configuring the UI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Configuring the user interface
```

no abbreviations in headlines

> To enable and configure the Device Authorization Grant in Hydra, adjust the following settings in your Hydra configuration file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable and configure the Device Authorization Grant in Ory Hydra, adjust the following settings in your configuration file:
```

```
urls:
  device:
    verification: http://path/to/device/verification/ui
    success: http://path/to/device/success
```

> ### Configuring user_code entropy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Configuring user code entropy
```

avoid "code" syntac in headlines

> Depending on your security needs and your traffic load, you may wish to enhance your user_code entropy. The hydra

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on your security needs and your traffic load, you may wish to enhance your user_code entropy. The Ory Hydra
```

always use the correct service name

> Depending on your security needs and your traffic load, you may wish to enhance your user_code entropy. The hydra

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on your security needs and your traffic load, you may wish to enhance your `user_code` entropy. The hydra
```

`oauth2.device_authorization.user_code_entropy` configuration supports 3 values:

> - `high`: user_code is 8 characters long and consists of alphanumeric characters, excluding some ambiguous symbols
> - `medium`: user_code is 8 characters long and consists only of upper case letter
> - `low`: user_code is 9 characters long and consists of numbers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `high`: `user_code` is 8 characters long and consists of alphanumeric characters, excluding some ambiguous symbols
- `medium`: `user_code` is 8 characters long and consists only of upper case letter
- `low`: `user_code` is 9 characters long and consists of numbers
```

> Keep in mind that higher entropy may make it harder for the user to enter the user_code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keep in mind that higher entropy may make it harder for the user to enter the code.
```

> ## Device Verification UI implementation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Device verification user interface implementation
```

---
id: device-authorization
title: Device Authorization
sidebar_label: Device authorization flow
---

The OAuth 2.0 Device Authorization Grant (RFC 8628) brings OAuth to devices with internet connectivity but limited input 
capabilities. This flow is designed for smart TVs, streaming devices, IoT hardware, printers, AI agents, and other connected devices 

> where typing credentials isn't practical. Here's how it works: the device to be authenticated displays a URL and a short code, prompting 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
capabilities. This flow is designed for smart TVs, streaming devices, IoT hardware, printers, remote terminal sessions, AI agents, and other connected devices 
where typing credentials or opening a browser isn't practical or possible. Here's how it works: the device to be authenticated displays a URL and a short code, prompting 
```

> you to open that URL on your phone or computer to authorize access. The two devices don't need to communicate directly—the authorization 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you to open that URL on your phone or computer to authorize access. After successful authorization, the device will get an access and refresh token. The two devices don't need to communicate directly—the authorization 
```

        D->>+AS: Request Token by device code
    end
    AS-->>-D: Token
    D-->>D: Process and store token
    deactivate D
`} />
```

### Step 1: Device requests authorization

The user attempts to log in through the limited input device. The device sends a POST request to the authorization server to initiate
the flow with the following parameters:

- `client_id`: The ID of the client (device) that's making the request
- `scope` (optional): The scope of the access request, which specifies which resources the requesting device can access

The authorization server responds with the following information:

- `device_code`: A unique code to identify the authorization request
- `user_code`: A code the user enters at the verification URL
- `verification_uri`: The URL where the user authorizes the device
- `verification_uri_complete`: The URL where the user authorizes the device, with the user_code already filled in
- `expires_in`: The lifespan of the device code (in seconds)
- `interval`: The polling interval (in seconds) for the client to check if the user has authorized the device yet

### Step 2: Display user code and verification URI

> The device shows the user the `user_code` and `verification_uri` it received from the authorization server.

Reviewer 3: Fix! Add 'the'
From: this can be in form of a URL
To: this can be in the form of a URL

### Step 3: User grants permission

The user visits the provided URI on a separate device, such as a phone, and enters the code. Once the user enters the code, 
the user is prompted to log in, if not already authenticated, and grants or denies permission to the client (device). After granting 
permission, the user is redirected to a page confirming they are successfully logged in.

### Step 4: Device polls for the access token

While the user is authorizing the device, the device polls the `token` endpoint of the authorization server to check whether the
user has completed the authorization process, by making a POST request with the following parameters:

- `client_id`: The ID of the client that's making the request
- `device_code`: The device code returned from the authorization request
- `grant_type`: This must always be `urn:ietf:params:oauth:grant-type:device_code`

> After the user grants permission, the authenicaton server sends an access token to the device, which is used to access the protected resource.

Reviewer 2: In the context of OAuth2 we typically refer to "consent", and I think we should keep this consistent so that readers are not confusing this with actual permissions.

## Configuration options

### Configuring the user interface

To enable and configure the device authorization grant in Ory Hydra, adjust the following settings in your configuration file:

```
urls:
  device:
    verification: http://path/to/device/verification/ui
    success: http://path/to/device/success
```

### Configuring user code entropy

Depending on your security needs and your traffic load, you should choose the appropriate `user_code` entropy. The 
`oauth2.device_authorization.user_code_entropy` configuration supports 3 values:

- `high`: `user_code` is 8 characters long and consists of alphanumeric characters, excluding some ambiguous symbols
- `medium`: `user_code` is 8 characters long and consists of only upper case alphabetic characters
- `low`: `user_code` is 9 characters long and consists of only numberic characters

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

It is also possible to configure the length and character set directly:

```yaml
oauth2:
  device_authorization:
    user_code:
      length: 8
      character_set: abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz0123456789
```
